Unix (all-caps UNIX for the trademark) is a family of multitasking, multiuser
computer operating systems that derive from the original AT&T Unix, developed
in the 1970s at the Bell Labs research center by Ken Thompson, Dennis Ritchie,
and others.[3]

Initially intended for use inside the Bell System, AT&T licensed Unix to
outside parties from the late 1970s, leading to a variety of both academic and
commercial variants of Unix from vendors such as the University of California,
Berkeley (BSD), Microsoft (Xenix), IBM (AIX) and Sun Microsystems (Solaris).
AT&T finally sold its rights in Unix to Novell in the early 1990s, which then
sold its Unix business to the Santa Cruz Operation (SCO) in 1995,[4] but the
UNIX trademark passed to the industry standards consortium The Open Group,
which allows the use of the mark for certified operating systems compliant with
the Single UNIX Specification (SUS). Among these is Apple's OS X,[5] which is
the Unix version with the largest installed base as of 2014.

From the power user's or programmer's perspective, Unix systems are
characterized by a modular design that is sometimes called the "Unix
philosophy", meaning that the operating system provides a set of simple tools
that each perform a limited, well-defined function,[6] with a unified
filesystem as the main means of communication[3] and a shell scripting and
command language to combine the tools to perform complex workflows. Aside from
the modular design, Unix also distinguishes itself from its predecessors as the
first portable operating system: almost the entire operating system is written
in the C programming language[7] that allowed Unix to reach numerous platforms.

Many clones of Unix have arisen over the years, of which Linux is the most
popular, having overtaken the popularity of SUS-certified Unices on server
platforms since its inception in the early 1990s.


  - Wikipedia, "Unix", extract
