Augusta Ada King, Countess of Lovelace (née Byron; 10 December 1815 – 27
November 1852) was an English mathematician and writer, chiefly known for her
work on Charles Babbage's early mechanical general-purpose computer, the
Analytical Engine. Her notes on the engine include what is recognised as the
first algorithm intended to be carried out by a machine. Because of this, she
is often regarded as the first computer programmer.[1][2][3]

Lovelace was born 10 December 1815 as the only legitimate child of the poet
George, Lord Byron and his wife Anne Isabella Noel.[4] All Byron's other
children were born out of wedlock to other women.[5] Byron separated from his
wife a month after Ada was born and left England forever four months later,
eventually dying of disease in the Greek War of Independence when Ada was eight
years old. Ada's mother remained bitter towards Lord Byron and promoted Ada's
interest in mathematics and logic in an effort to prevent her from developing
what she saw as the insanity seen in her father, but Ada remained interested in
him despite this (and was, upon her eventual death, buried next to him at her
request).

Ada described her approach as "poetical science"[6] and herself as an "Analyst
(& Metaphysician)".[7] As a young adult, her mathematical talents led her to an
ongoing working relationship and friendship with fellow British mathematician
Charles Babbage, and in particular Babbage's work on the Analytical Engine.
Between 1842 and 1843, she translated an article by Italian military engineer
Luigi Menabrea on the engine, which she supplemented with an elaborate set of
notes of her own, simply called Notes. These notes contain what many consider
to be the first computer program—that is, an algorithm designed to be carried
out by a machine. Lovelace's notes are important in the early history of
computers. She also developed a vision of the capability of computers to go
beyond mere calculating or number-crunching, while others, including Babbage
himself, focused only on those capabilities.[8] Her mind-set of "poetical
science" led her to ask questions about the Analytical Engine (as shown in her
notes) examining how individuals and society relate to technology as a
collaborative tool.[5]

Biography Childhood

George Byron expected his baby to be a "glorious boy" and was disappointed when
his wife gave birth to a girl.[9] Augusta was named after Byron's half-sister,
Augusta Leigh, and was called "Ada" by Byron himself.[10] Ada, aged four

On 16 January 1816, Annabella, at George's behest, left for her parents' home
at Kirkby Mallory taking one-month-old Ada with her.[9] Although English law at
the time gave fathers full custody of their children in cases of separation,
Byron made no attempt to claim his parental rights[11] but did request that his
sister keep him informed of Ada's welfare.[12] On 21 April, Byron signed the
Deed of Separation, although very reluctantly, and left England for good a few
days later.[13] Aside from an acrimonious separation, Annabella continually
throughout her life made allegations about Byron's immoral behaviour.[14] This
set of events made Ada famous in Victorian society. Byron did not have a
relationship with his daughter, and never saw her again. He died in 1824 when
she was eight years old. Her mother was the only significant parental figure in
her life.[15] Ada was not shown the family portrait of her father (covered in
green shroud) until her twentieth birthday.[16] Her mother became Baroness
Wentworth in her own right in 1856.

Annabella did not have a close relationship with the young Ada, and often left
her in the care of her own mother Judith, Hon. Lady Milbanke, who doted on her
grandchild. However, due to societal attitudes of the time—which favoured the
husband in any separation, with the welfare of any child acting as
mitigation—Annabella had to present herself as a loving mother to the rest of
society. This included writing anxious letters to Lady Milbanke about Ada's
welfare, with a cover note saying to retain the letters in case she had to use
them to show maternal concern.[17] In one letter to Lady Milbanke, she referred
to Ada as "it": "I talk to it for your satisfaction, not my own, and shall be
very glad when you have it under your own."[18] In her teenage years, several
of her mother's close friends watched Ada for any sign of moral deviation. Ada
dubbed these observers the "Furies", and later complained they exaggerated and
invented stories about her.[19] Ada, aged seventeen, 1832

Ada was often ill, beginning in early childhood. At the age of eight, she
experienced headaches that obscured her vision.[10] In June 1829, she was
paralysed after a bout of measles. She was subjected to continuous bed rest for
nearly a year, which may have extended her period of disability. By 1831, she
was able to walk with crutches. Despite being ill Ada developed her
mathematical and technological skills. At age 12, this future "Lady Fairy", as
Charles Babbage affectionately called her, decided she wanted to fly. Ada went
about the project methodically, thoughtfully, with imagination and passion. Her
first step in February 1828, was to construct wings. She investigated different
material and sizes. She considered various materials for the wings; paper,
oilsilk, wires and feathers. She examined the anatomy of birds to determine the
right proportion between the wings and the body. She decided to write a book
Flyology illustrating, with plates, some of her findings. She decided what
equipment she would need, for example, a compass, to "cut across the country by
the most direct road", so that she could surmount mountains, rivers and
valleys. Her final step was to integrate steam with the "art of flying".[5]

In early 1833, Ada had an affair with a tutor and, after being caught, tried to
elope with him. The tutor's relatives recognised her and contacted her mother.
Annabella and her friends covered the incident up to prevent a public
scandal.[20] Ada never met her younger half-sister, Allegra, daughter of Lord
Byron and Claire Clairmont. Allegra died in 1822 at the age of five. Ada did
have some contact with Elizabeth Medora Leigh, the daughter of Byron's
half-sister Augusta Leigh, who purposely avoided Ada as much as possible when
introduced at Court.[21] Adult years

Lovelace developed a strong relationship with her tutor Mary Somerville. She
had a strong respect and affection for Somerville.[22] and the two of them
corresponded for many years. Other acquaintances included Andrew Crosse, Sir
David Brewster, Charles Wheatstone, Charles Dickens and Michael Faraday. She
was presented at Court at the age of seventeen "and became a popular belle of
the season" in part because of her "brilliant mind."[23] By 1834, Ada was a
regular at Court and started attending various events. She danced often and was
able to charm many people, and was described by most people as being dainty.
However, John Hobhouse, Lord Byron's friend, was the exception and he described
her as "a large, coarse-skinned young woman but with something of my friend's
features, particularly the mouth."[24] This description followed their meeting
on 24 February 1834 in which Ada made it clear to Hobhouse that she did not
like him, probably due to the influence of her mother, which led her to dislike
all of her father's friends. This first impression was not to last, and they
later became friends.[25]

On 8 July 1835, she married William, 8th Baron King,[a] becoming Lady King.[26]
Their residence was Ockham Park, a large estate in Surrey, along with another
estate on Loch Torridon in Ross-shire, and a home in London. They spent their
honeymoon at Worthy Manor in Ashley Combe near Porlock Weir, Somerset. The
Manor had been built as a hunting lodge in 1799 and was improved by King in
preparation for their honeymoon. It later became their summer retreat and was
further improved during this time.

They had three children: Byron (born 12 May 1836); Anne Isabella (called
Annabella; born 22 September 1837); and Ralph Gordon (born 2 July 1839).
Immediately after the birth of Annabella, Lady King experienced "a tedious and
suffering illness, which took months to cure."[25] In 1838, her husband was
made Earl of Lovelace and Viscount Ockham,[27] meaning Ada became the Countess
of Lovelace. In 1843–44, Ada's mother assigned William Benjamin Carpenter to
teach Ada's children, and to act as a 'moral' instructor for Ada.[28] He
quickly fell for her, and encouraged her to express any frustrated affections,
claiming that his marriage meant he'd never act in an "unbecoming" manner. When
it became clear that Carpenter was trying to start an affair, Ada cut it
off.[29]

In 1841, Lovelace and Medora Leigh (daughter of Lord Byron's half-sister
Augusta Leigh) were told by Ada's mother that her father was also Medora's
father.[30] On 27 February 1841, Ada wrote to her mother: "I am not in the
least astonished. In fact you merely confirm what I have for years and years
felt scarcely a doubt about, but should have considered it most improper in me
to hint to you that I in any way suspected."[31] She did not blame the
incestuous relationship on Byron, but instead blamed Augusta Leigh: "I fear she
is more inherently wicked than he ever was."[32] In the 1840s, Ada flirted with
scandals: firstly from a relaxed relationship with men who were not her
husband, which led to rumours of affairs[33]—and secondly, her love of
gambling. The gambling led to her forming a syndicate with male friends, and an
ambitious attempt in 1851 to create a mathematical model for successful large
bets. This went disastrously wrong, leaving her thousands of pounds in debt to
the syndicate, forcing her to admit it all to her husband.[34] She had a
shadowy relationship with Andrew Crosse's son John from 1844 onwards. John
Crosse destroyed most of their correspondence after her death as part of a
legal agreement. She bequeathed him the only heirlooms her father had
personally left to her.[35] During her final illness, she would panic at the
idea of the younger Crosse being kept from visiting her.[36] Death Painting of
Ada Lovelace at a piano in 1852 by Henry Phillips. While she was in great pain
at the time, she sat for the painting as Phillips' father, Thomas Phillips, had
painted Ada's father, Lord Byron.

Ada Lovelace died at the age of 36 – the same age that her father had died – on
27 November 1852,[37] from uterine cancer probably exacerbated by bloodletting
by her physicians.[38] The illness lasted several months, in which time
Annabella took command over whom Ada saw, and excluded all of her friends and
confidants. Under her mother's influence, she had a religious transformation
and was coaxed into repenting of her previous conduct and making Annabella her
executor.[39] She lost contact with her husband after she confessed something
to him on 30 August which caused him to abandon her bedside. What she told him
is unknown.[40] She was buried, at her request, next to her father at the
Church of St. Mary Magdalene in Hucknall, Nottinghamshire.  Education

Throughout her illnesses, she continued her education.[41] Her mother's
obsession with rooting out any of the insanity of which she accused Byron was
one of the reasons that Ada was taught mathematics from an early age. She was
privately schooled in mathematics and science by William Frend, William
King,[a] and Mary Somerville, noted researcher and scientific author of the
19th century. One of her later tutors was mathematician and logician Augustus
De Morgan. From 1832, when she was seventeen, her remarkable mathematical
abilities began to emerge,[23] and her interest in mathematics dominated the
majority of her adult life. In a letter to Lady Byron, De Morgan suggested that
her daughter's skill in mathematics could lead her to become "an original
mathematical investigator, perhaps of first-rate eminence."[42]

Lovelace often questioned basic assumptions by integrating poetry and science.
While studying differential calculus, she wrote to De Morgan:

    I may remark that the curious transformations many formulae can undergo,
    the unsuspected and to a beginner apparently impossible identity of forms
    exceedingly dissimilar at first sight, is I think one of the chief
    difficulties in the early part of mathematical studies. I am often reminded
    of certain sprites and fairies one reads of, who are at one's elbows in one
    shape now, and the next minute in a form most dissimilar...[43]

Lovelace believed that intuition and imagination were critical to effectively
applying mathematical and scientific concepts. She valued metaphysics as much
as mathematics, viewing both as tools for exploring "the unseen worlds around
us".[44] Work

Throughout her life, Ada was strongly interested in scientific developments and
fads of the day, including phrenology[45] and mesmerism.[46] Even after her
famous work with Babbage, Ada continued to work on other projects. In 1844, she
commented to a friend Woronzow Greig about her desire to create a mathematical
model for how the brain gives rise to thoughts and nerves to feelings ("a
calculus of the nervous system").[47] She never achieved this, however. In
part, her interest in the brain came from a long-running preoccupation,
inherited from her mother, about her 'potential' madness. As part of her
research into this project, she visited electrical engineer Andrew Crosse in
1844 to learn how to carry out electrical experiments.[48] In the same year,
she wrote a review of a paper by Baron Karl von Reichenbach, Researches on
Magnetism, but this was not published and does not appear to have progressed
past the first draft.[49] In 1851, the year before her cancer struck, she wrote
to her mother mentioning "certain productions" she was working on regarding the
relation of maths and music.[50] Portrait of Ada by British painter Margaret
Sarah Carpenter (1836)

Lovelace first met Charles Babbage in June 1833, through their mutual friend
Mary Somerville. Later that month, Babbage invited Lovelace to see the
prototype for his Difference Engine.[51] She became fascinated with the machine
and used her relationship with Somerville to visit Babbage as often as she
could. Babbage was impressed by Lovelace's intellect and analytic skills. He
called her The Enchantress of Numbers. In 1843 he wrote of her:

    Forget this world and all its troubles and if possible its multitudinous
    Charlatans—every thing in short but the Enchantress of Numbers.[52]

During a nine-month period in 1842–43, Ada translated Italian mathematician
Luigi Menabrea's memoir on Babbage's newest proposed machine, the Analytical
Engine. With the article, she appended a set of notes.[53] Explaining the
Analytical Engine's function was a difficult task, as even other scientists did
not really grasp the concept and the British establishment was uninterested in
it.[54] Ada's notes even had to explain how the Engine differed from the
original Difference Engine.[55] Her work was well received at the time;
scientist Michael Faraday described himself as a supporter of her writing.[56]

The notes are longer than the memoir itself and include (in Section G[57]), in
complete detail, a method for calculating a sequence of Bernoulli numbers with
the Engine, which would have run correctly had the Analytical Engine been built
(only his Difference Engine has been built, completed in London in 2002).[58]
Based on this work, Lovelace is now widely considered the first computer
programmer[1] and her method is recognised as the world's first computer
program.[59]

Section G also contains Ada Lovelace's famous dismissal of artificial
intelligence. She wrote that "The Analytical Engine has no pretensions whatever
to originate anything. It can do whatever we know how to order it to perform.
It can follow analysis; but it has no power of anticipating any analytical
relations or truths." This objection has been the subject of much debate and
rebuttal, for example by Alan Turing in his paper "Computing Machinery and
Intelligence".

Lovelace and Babbage had a minor falling out when the papers were published,
when he tried to leave his own statement (a criticism of the government's
treatment of his Engine) as an unsigned preface—which would imply that she had
written that also. When Taylor's Scientific Memoirs ruled that the statement
should be signed, Babbage wrote to Ada asking her to withdraw the paper. This
was the first that she knew he was leaving it unsigned, and she wrote back
refusing to withdraw the paper. Historian Benjamin Woolley theorised that, "His
actions suggested he had so enthusiastically sought Ada's involvement, and so
happily indulged her ... because of her 'celebrated name'."[60] Their
friendship recovered, and they continued to correspond. On 12 August 1851, when
she was dying of cancer, Ada wrote to him asking him to be her executor, though
this letter did not give him the necessary legal authority. Part of the terrace
at Worthy Manor was known as Philosopher's Walk, as it was there that Ada and
Babbage were reputed to have walked while discussing mathematical principles.
[56] First computer program Lovelace's diagram from Note G, the first published
computer algorithm

In 1840, Babbage was invited to give a seminar at the University of Turin about
his Analytical Engine. Luigi Menabrea, a young Italian engineer, and future
Prime Minister of Italy, wrote up Babbage's lecture in French, and this
transcript was subsequently published in the Bibliothèque universelle de Genève
in October 1842. Babbage's friend Charles Wheatstone commissioned Ada to
translate Menabrea's paper into English. She then augmented the paper with
notes, which were added to the translation. Ada spent the better part of a year
doing this, assisted with input from Babbage. These notes, which are more
extensive than Menabrea's paper, were then published in Taylor's Scientific
Memoirs under the initialism AAL. In 1953, more than a century after her death,
Ada's notes on Babbage's Analytical Engine were republished. The engine has now
been recognised as an early model for a computer and Ada's notes as a
description of a computer and software.[61]

Her notes were labelled alphabetically from A to G. In note G, she describes an
algorithm for the Analytical Engine to compute Bernoulli numbers. It is
considered the first algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on
a computer, and Ada has often been cited as the first computer programmer for
this reason.[62][63] The engine was never completed, however, so her code was
never tested.[64] Conceptual leap

In her notes, Lovelace emphasised the difference between the Analytical Engine
and previous calculating machines, particularly its ability to be programmed to
solve problems of any complexity.[65] She realised the potential of the device
extended far beyond mere number crunching. She wrote:

    [The Analytical Engine] might act upon other things besides number, were
    objects found whose mutual fundamental relations could be expressed by
    those of the abstract science of operations, and which should be also
    susceptible of adaptations to the action of the operating notation and
    mechanism of the engine...

    Supposing, for instance, that the fundamental relations of pitched sounds
    in the science of harmony and of musical composition were susceptible of
    such expression and adaptations, the engine might compose elaborate and
    scientific pieces of music of any degree of complexity or extent.[66]

This analysis was a conceptual leap from previous ideas about the capabilities
of computing devices, and anticipated the capabilities and implications of
modern computing one hundred years before they were realised. Walter Isaacson
ascribes Lovelace's insight regarding the application of computing to any
process based on logical symbols to an observation about textiles: "When she
saw some mechanical looms that used punchcards to direct the weaving of
beautiful patterns, it reminded her of how Babbage’s engine used punched cards
to make calculations." [67] This insight is seen as significant by writers such
as Betty Toole and Benjamin Woolley, as well as programmer John Graham-Cumming,
whose project Plan 28 has the aim of constructing the first complete Analytical
Engine.[68][69][70] Controversy over extent of contributions Criticism

Though Ada Lovelace is sometimes referred to as the first computer programmer,
at least two people have published claims to the contrary:

Allan G. Bromley, in the 1990 essay Difference and Analytical Engines,
wrote,[71]

    All but one of the programs cited in her notes had been prepared by Babbage
    from three to seven years earlier. The exception was prepared by Babbage
    for her, although she did detect a 'bug' in it. Not only is there no
    evidence that Ada ever prepared a program for the Analytical Engine, but
    her correspondence with Babbage shows that she did not have the knowledge
    to do so.

Blue plaque to Lovelace in St. James's Square, London

For his PhD thesis (later republished), Bruce Collier, who went on to write a
minor biography of Babbage aimed at school children, claimed:

    It would be only a slight exaggeration to say that Babbage wrote the
    'Notes' to Menabrea's paper, but for reasons of his own encouraged the
    illusion in the minds of Ada and the public that they were authored by her.
    It is no exaggeration to say that she was a manic depressive with the most
    amazing delusions about her own talents, and a rather shallow understanding
    of both Charles Babbage and the Analytical Engine.[72]

Defence

Lovelace did, however, work for nine months on her article while consulting
with Babbage on difficult equations. By Babbage's own admission, she pointed
out what otherwise might have been remembered as the first computer bug in his
equations, which also makes her possibly the world's first debugger. Of
Lovelace's contribution, Babbage wrote, in his Passages from the Life of a
Philosopher (1864):[73]

    I then suggested that she add some notes to Menabrea's memoir, an idea
    which was immediately adopted. We discussed together the various
    illustrations that might be introduced; I suggested several but the
    selection was entirely her own. So also was the algebraic working out of
    the different problems, except, indeed, that relating to the numbers of
    Bernoulli, which I had offered to do to save Lady Lovelace the trouble.
    This she sent back to me for an amendment, having detected a grave mistake
    which I had made in the process.

Eugene Eric Kim and Betty Alexandar Toole elucidate Lovelace's role in writing
the first computer program by describing her role as that of a programmer who
derives an algorithm from a formula:[64]

    From this letter, two things are clear. First, including a program that
    computed Bernoulli numbers was Ada's idea. Second, Babbage at the very
    least provided the formulas for calculating Bernoulli numbers... Letters
    between Babbage and Ada at the time seem to indicate that Babbage's
    contributions were limited to the mathematical formula and that Ada created
    the program herself.

Kim and Toole also write:

    [Lovelace] was certainly capable of writing the program herself given the
    proper formula; this is clear from her depth of understanding regarding the
    process of programming and from her improvements on Babbage's programming
    notation.[64]

Curator and author Doron Swade, in his 2001 book The Difference Engine, writes:

    The first algorithms or stepwise operations leading to a solution—what we
    now recognize as a 'program', although the word was used neither by her nor
    by Babbage—were certainly published under her name. But the work had been
    completed by Babbage much earlier.[74]

Kim and Toole dispute this claim:[64]

    Babbage had written several small programs for the Analytical Engine in his
    notebook in 1836 and 1837, but none of them approached the complexity of
    the Bernoulli numbers program.

Far more clear is her important role and legacy as an author in predicting the
potential of computers to perform tasks more complex than simple industrial
arithmetic, as well as her role as an inspiration to Babbage and generations of
computer scientists to come afterwards.

Writer Benjamin Woolley writes that while Lovelace's mathematical abilities
have been contested,[75] she can claim "some contribution":[76]

    Note A, the first she wrote, and the one over which Babbage had the least
    influence, contains a sophisticated analysis of the idea and implications
    of mechanical computation...

Woolley claims that this discussion of the implications of Babbage's invention
was the most important aspect of her work. According to Woolley, her notes were
"detailed and thorough [a]nd still... metaphysical, meaningfully so." They
explained how the machine worked and "[rose] above the technical minutiae of
Babbage's extraordinary invention to reveal its true grandeur."[77]

Finally, according to ComputerHistory.org:[78]

    She has been referred to as '[the] prophet of the computer age'. Certainly
    she was the first to express the potential for computers outside
    mathematics.

In popular culture An illustration inspired by the A. E. Chalon portrait
created for the Ada Initiative, which supports open technology and women

Lovelace has been portrayed in Romulus Linney's 1977 play Childe Byron,[79] the
1990 steampunk novel The Difference Engine by William Gibson and Bruce
Sterling,[80] the 1997 film Conceiving Ada,[81] and in John Crowley's 2005
novel Lord Byron's Novel: The Evening Land, where she is featured as an unseen
character whose personality is forcefully depicted in her annotations and
anti-heroic efforts to archive her father's lost novel.[82]

In Tom Stoppard's 1993 play Arcadia, the precocious teenage genius Thomasina
Coverly (a character "apparently based"[83][84] on Ada Lovelace—the play also
involves Lord Byron) comes to understand chaos theory, and theorises the second
law of thermodynamics, before either is officially recognised.

Lovelace and Babbage are the main characters in Sydney Padua's webcomic and
graphic novel The Thrilling Adventures of Lovelace and Babbage. The comic
feature extensive footnotes on the history of Ada Lovelace and many lines of
dialogue are drawn from actual correspondence.[85] Commemoration

The computer language Ada, created on behalf of the United States Department of
Defense, was named after Ada Lovelace. The reference manual for the language
was approved on 10 December 1980, and the Department of Defense Military
Standard for the language, MIL-STD-1815, was given the number of the year of
her birth. Since 1998, the British Computer Society has awarded a medal in her
name[86] and in 2008 initiated an annual competition for women students of
computer science.[87] In the UK, the BCSWomen Lovelace Colloquium, the annual
conference for women undergraduates is named after Ada Lovelace.[88]

"Ada Lovelace Day" is an annual event celebrated in mid-October[89] whose goal
is to "...raise the profile of women in science, technology, engineering and
maths."

The Ada Initiative is a non-profit organisation dedicated to increasing the
involvement of women in the free culture and open source movements.[90]

The Engineering in Computer Science and Telecommunications College building in
Zaragoza University is called the Ada Byron Building.[91] The village computer
centre in the village of Porlock, near where Ada Lovelace lived, is named after
her. There is a building in the small town of Kirkby-in-Ashfield,
Nottinghamshire named Ada Lovelace House.[92] One of the tunnel boring machines
excavating the tunnels for London's Crossrail project is named Ada in
commemoration of Ada Lovelace.[93]

Ada: A Journal of Gender, New Media, and Technology is an "open-access,
multi-modal, peer-reviewed feminist journal concerned with the intersections of
gender, new media, and technology" that began in 2012 and is run by the Fembot
Collective.[94]

Adafruit Industries is an open-source hardware company named in honour of Ada
Lovelace.[95] Titles and styles by which she was known

    10 December 1815 – 8 July 1835: The Honourable Ada Byron 8 July 1835 – 30
    June 1838: The Right Honourable The Lady King 30 June 1838 – 27 November
    1852: The Right Honourable The Countess of Lovelace

